docs/core/howto/tube.rst, before:


An Introduction to Tubes
========================

What Are Tubes?
---------------

The :api:`twisted.tubes <twisted.tubes>` package provides composable flow-control and data processing.

Flow-control is control over the source, destination, and rate of data being processed.
Tubes implements this in a type-agnostic way, meaning that a set of rules for controlling the flow of data can control that flow regardless of the type of that data, from raw streams of bytes to application-specific messages and back again.

Composable data processing refers to processing that can occur in independent units.
For example, the conversion of a continuous stream of bytes into a discrete sequence of messages can be implemented independently from the presentation of or reactions to those messages.
This allows for similar messages to be relayed in different formats and by different protocols, but be processed by the same code.

In this document, you will learn how to compose founts (places where data comes from), drains (places where data goes to), and tubes (things that modify data by converting inputs to outputs) to create flows.
You'll also learn how to create your own tubes to perform your own conversions of input to output.
By the end, you should be able to put a series of tubes onto the Internet as a server or a client.


Getting Connected: an Echo Server
---------------------------------

Let's start with an example.
The simplest way to process any data is to avoid processing it entirely, to pass input straight on to output.
On a network, that means an echo server as described in :rfc:`862`.
Here's a function which uses interfaces defined by ``twisted.tubes`` to send its input straight on to its output:

.. code-block:: python

    def echoFlow(fount, drain):
        return fount.flowTo(drain)

In the above example, ``echoFlow`` takes two things: a :api:`twisted.tubes.itube.IFount <fount>`, or a source of data, and a :api:`twisted.tubes.itube.IDrain <drain>` , or a place where data eventually goes.
We call such a function a "flow", because it establishes a flow of data from one place to another.
Most often, the arguments to such a function are the input from and the output to the same network connection.
The fount represents data coming in over the connection, and the drain represents data going back out over that same connection.

To *use* ``echoFlow`` as a server, we have to attach it to a listening :doc:`endpoint <endpoints>`.

:download:`echotube.py <listings/tubes/echotube.py>`

.. literalinclude:: listings/tubes/echotube.py

This fully-functioning example (just run it with "``python echotube.py``") implements an echo server.
By default, you can test it out by typing into it.

.. code-block:: console

    $ python echotube.py
    are you an echo server?
    are you an echo server?
    ^C

If you want to see this run on a network, you can give it an endpoint description.
For example, to run on TCP port 4321:

.. code-block:: console

    $ python echotube.py tcp:4321

and then in another command-line window:

.. code-block:: console

    $ telnet 127.0.0.1 4321
    Trying 127.0.0.1...
    Connected to localhost.
    Escape character is '^]'.
    are you an echo server?
    are you an echo server?
    ^]
    telnet> close
    Connection closed.

You can test it out with ``telnet localhost 4321``.

.. note::

    If you are on Windows, ``telnet`` is not installed by default.
    If you see an error message like:

    .. code-block:: console

        'telnet' is not recognized as an internal or external command,
        operable program or batch file.

    then you can install ``telnet`` by running the command

    .. code-block:: console

        C:\> dism /online /Enable-Feature /FeatureName:TelnetClient

    in an Administrator command-prompt first.

However, this example still performs no processing of the data that it is receiving.

Processing Some Data: A Networked Calculator
--------------------------------------------

To demonstrate both receiving and processing data, let's write a `reverse polish notation <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Reverse_Polish_notation>`_ calculator for addition and multiplication.

Interacting with it should look like this:

.. code-block:: console

    > 3
    > 4
    > +
    = 7
    > 2
    > *
    = 14

In order to implement this program, we will construct a *series* of objects which process the data; specifically, we will create a :api:`twisted.tubes.series <series>` of :api:`twisted.tubes.Tube <Tube>`\s.
Each :api:`twisted.tubes.Tube` in the :api:`twisted.tubes.series` will be responsible for processing part of the data.

First we will create a tube that transforms a continuous stream of bytes into lines.
Then, a tube that will transform lines into a combination of numbers and operators (functions that perform the work of the ``"+"`` and ``"*"`` commands), then from numbers and operators into more numbers - sums and products - from those integers into lines, and finally from those lines into newline-terminated segments of data that are sent back out.










Tubes Versus Protocols
======================

If you've used Twisted before, you may notice that half of the line-splitting above is exactly what :api:`twisted.protocols.basic.LineReceiver <LineReceiver>` does, and that there are lots of related classes that can do similar things for other message types.
The other half is handled by :doc:`producers and consumers <producers>`.
``tubes`` is a *newer*  interface than those things, and you will find it somewhat improved.
If you're writing new code, you should generally prefer to use ``tubes``.

There are three ways in which ``tubes`` is better than using producers, consumers, and the various ``XXXReceiver`` classes directly.

#. ``twisted.tubes`` is *general purpose*.
   Whereas each ``FooReceiver`` class receives ``Foo`` objects in its own way, ``tubes`` provides consistent, re-usable abstractions for sending and receiving.
#. ``twisted.tubes`` *does not require subclassing*.
   The fact that different responsibilities live in different objects makes it easier to test and instrument them.
#. ``twisted.tubes`` *handles flow-control automatically*.
   The manual flow-control notifications provided by ``IProducer`` and ``IConsumer`` are still used internally in ``tubes`` to hook up to ``twisted.internet``, but the interfaces defined in ``tubes`` itself are considerably more flexible, as they allow you to hook together chains of arbitrary length, as opposed to just getting buffer notifications for a single connection to a single object.

Commit message:

try to be consistent about first/second person, start building up example in terms of :pyobject: literalincludes instead of just whomping whole files in there
git-svn-id: svn://svn.twistedmatrix.com/svn/Twisted/branches/tubes-1956-6@42688 bbbe8e31-12d6-0310-92fd-ac37d47ddeeb

docs/core/howto/tube.rst, after:


An Introduction to Tubes
========================

What Are Tubes?
---------------

The :api:`twisted.tubes <twisted.tubes>` package provides composable flow-control and data processing.

Flow-control is control over the source, destination, and rate of data being processed.
Tubes implements this in a type-agnostic way, meaning that a set of rules for controlling the flow of data can control that flow regardless of the type of that data, from raw streams of bytes to application-specific messages and back again.

Composable data processing refers to processing that can occur in independent units.
For example, the conversion of a continuous stream of bytes into a discrete sequence of messages can be implemented independently from the presentation of or reactions to those messages.
This allows for similar messages to be relayed in different formats and by different protocols, but be processed by the same code.

In this document, you will learn how to compose founts (places where data comes from), drains (places where data goes to), and tubes (things that modify data by converting inputs to outputs) to create flows.
You'll also learn how to create your own tubes to perform your own conversions of input to output.
By the end, you should be able to put a series of tubes onto the Internet as a server or a client.


Getting Connected: an Echo Server
---------------------------------

Let's start with an example.
The simplest way to process any data is to avoid processing it entirely, to pass input straight on to output.
On a network, that means an echo server as described in :rfc:`862`.
Here's a function which uses interfaces defined by ``twisted.tubes`` to send its input straight on to its output:

.. code-block:: python

    def echoFlow(fount, drain):
        return fount.flowTo(drain)

In the above example, ``echoFlow`` takes two things: a :api:`twisted.tubes.itube.IFount <fount>`, or a source of data, and a :api:`twisted.tubes.itube.IDrain <drain>` , or a place where data eventually goes.
Such a function is called a "flow", because it establishes a flow of data from one place to another.
Most often, the arguments to such a function are the input from and the output to the same network connection.
The fount represents data coming in over the connection, and the drain represents data going back out over that same connection.

To *use* ``echoFlow`` as a server, you have to attach it to a listening :doc:`endpoint <endpoints>`.

:download:`echotube.py <listings/tubes/echotube.py>`

.. literalinclude:: listings/tubes/echotube.py

This fully-functioning example (just run it with "``python echotube.py``") implements an echo server.
By default, you can test it out by typing into it.

.. code-block:: console

    $ python echotube.py
    are you an echo server?
    are you an echo server?
    ^C

If you want to see this run on a network, you can give it an endpoint description.
For example, to run on TCP port 4321:

.. code-block:: console

    $ python echotube.py tcp:4321

and then in another command-line window:

.. code-block:: console

    $ telnet 127.0.0.1 4321
    Trying 127.0.0.1...
    Connected to localhost.
    Escape character is '^]'.
    are you an echo server?
    are you an echo server?
    ^]
    telnet> close
    Connection closed.

You can test it out with ``telnet localhost 4321``.

.. note::

    If you are on Windows, ``telnet`` is not installed by default.
    If you see an error message like:

    .. code-block:: console

        'telnet' is not recognized as an internal or external command,
        operable program or batch file.

    then you can install ``telnet`` by running the command

    .. code-block:: console

        C:\> dism /online /Enable-Feature /FeatureName:TelnetClient

    in an Administrator command-prompt first.

However, this example still performs no processing of the data that it is receiving.

Processing Some Data: A Networked Calculator
--------------------------------------------

To demonstrate both receiving and processing data, let's write a `reverse polish notation <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Reverse_Polish_notation>`_ calculator for addition and multiplication.

Interacting with it should look like this:

.. code-block:: console

    > 3
    > 4
    > +
    = 7
    > 2
    > *
    = 14

In order to implement this program, you will construct a *series* of objects which process the data; specifically, you will create a :api:`twisted.tubes.series <series>` of :api:`twisted.tubes.Tube <Tube>`\s.
Each :api:`twisted.tubes.Tube` in the :api:`twisted.tubes.series` will be responsible for processing part of the data.

Lets get started with just the core component that will actually perform calculations.

.. literalinclude:: listings/tubes/rpn.py
   :pyobject: Calculator

``Calculator`` gives you an API for pushing numbers onto a stack, and for performing an operation on the top two items in the stack, the result of which is then pushed to the top of the stack.

Now let's look at the full flow which will pass inputs to a ``Calculator`` and relay its output:

.. literalinclude:: listings/tubes/rpn.py
   :pyobject: calculatorSeries

The first tube in this series, provided by the `framing` module built in to `tubes`, transforms a stream of bytes into (``"\n"``\-delimited) lines.
Then, ``LinesToNumbersOrOperators`` - which you'll write in a moment - should transform lines into a combination of numbers and operators (functions that perform the work of the ``"+"`` and ``"*"`` commands), then from numbers and operators into more numbers - sums and products - from those integers into lines, and finally from those lines into newline-terminated segments of data that are sent back out.
A ``CalculatingTube`` should pass those numbers and operators to a ``Calculator``, and produce numbers as output.
`NumbersToLines` should convert the output numbers into byte strings, and `linesToBytes` performs the inverse of `bytesToLines` by simply appending ``"\n"`` characters to those outputs.

Let's look at `LinesToNumbersOrOperators`.

.. literalinclude:: listings/tubes/rpn.py
   :pyobject: LinesToNumbersOrOperators



Tubes Versus Protocols
======================

If you've used Twisted before, you may notice that half of the line-splitting above is exactly what :api:`twisted.protocols.basic.LineReceiver <LineReceiver>` does, and that there are lots of related classes that can do similar things for other message types.
The other half is handled by :doc:`producers and consumers <producers>`.
``tubes`` is a *newer*  interface than those things, and you will find it somewhat improved.
If you're writing new code, you should generally prefer to use ``tubes``.

There are three ways in which ``tubes`` is better than using producers, consumers, and the various ``XXXReceiver`` classes directly.

#. ``twisted.tubes`` is *general purpose*.
   Whereas each ``FooReceiver`` class receives ``Foo`` objects in its own way, ``tubes`` provides consistent, re-usable abstractions for sending and receiving.
#. ``twisted.tubes`` *does not require subclassing*.
   The fact that different responsibilities live in different objects makes it easier to test and instrument them.
#. ``twisted.tubes`` *handles flow-control automatically*.
   The manual flow-control notifications provided by ``IProducer`` and ``IConsumer`` are still used internally in ``tubes`` to hook up to ``twisted.internet``, but the interfaces defined in ``tubes`` itself are considerably more flexible, as they allow you to hook together chains of arbitrary length, as opposed to just getting buffer notifications for a single connection to a single object.
